.TH UNSWEETEN 1 local
.SH NAME
sweeten \- filter to translate Lisp/Scheme s-expressions to sweet-expressions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ll +8
.B sweeten [-b | --builtin-reader] [-C | --common-lisp] [-n] [file]...
.ll -8
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I sweeten
translates Lisp/Scheme s-expressions to sweet-expressions.
If no file is listed, it takes input from standard input,
and results are sent to standard output.
If one or more files are listed, they are processed in order,
with results sent to standard output.
.PP
Sweet-expressions are a way to represent Lisp/Scheme data and programs
that adds additional abbreviations beyond those in traditional s-expressions.
Well-formatted S-expressions should work as-is, but
sweet-expressions are intended to be easier for humans to understand.
Unlike most past efforts to make Lisp more readable, the
sweet-expression approach is
.I generic
(the notation does not depend on an underlying semantic) and
.I homoiconic
(the underlying data structure is clear from the syntax).
.PP
Sweet-expressions are actually the top of three tiers of notation,
each of which builds on the previous one.
For more information, see the man page for
.IR unsweeten .

.PP
Only semicolon comments outside any datum are copied to the output.
Block comments and comments inside a datum are never copied.

.PP
Sweeten creates only one of many possible representations of its input.
You may choose to tweak the results of
.IR sweeten ;
if you do, you can choose to use
.I diff-s-sweet(1)
to confirm that the resulting tweaked file is
semantically identical to the original.

.PP
By default it uses the reader of the underlying implementation (guile).

.PP
For more information, see
http://readable.sourceforge.net.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP 6
.BI -b
Use a built-in reader (instead of the guile read routine);
this may work better for your input.

.TP
.BI -C
Use a modified built-in reader (instead of the guile read routine)
designed to read Common Lisp.

.TP
.BI -n
Do not use "!" as an indentation character.


.\" .SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.\" .PP

.SH BUGS
.PP
This program assumes that the input does not contain any cycles
(improper lists are okay).
It can handle input with shared structures (without cycles), but
the fact that they are shared is lost in the result.
.PP
The Common Lisp reader (invoked with -C)
has not been as well tested.
It should work just fine for readings s-expressions that are
legal in both Scheme and Common Lisp.
It can also handle #\'name as an abbreviation for (function\ name),
as well as a few Common Lisp capabilities like #:, #., #+, and #P.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
The sweeten tool could be sent the following traditional s-expression:
.PP
  (define (factorial n)
    (if (<= n 1)
        1
        (* n (factorial (- n 1)))))

.PP
Sweeten might choose to represent it this way:

.PP
  define factorial(n)
    if {n <= 1}
      1
      {n * factorial{n - 1}}

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
.IR unsweeten(1) ,
.IR diff-s-sweet(1) ,
.IR sweet-run(1) .

.SH "COPYRIGHT NOTICE"
.PP
Copyright \(co 2012 David A. Wheeler
.PP
This software (including the documentation)
is released as open source software under the "MIT" license:
.PP
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.PP
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.PP
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

