.TH UNSWEETEN 1 local
.SH NAME
sweet-run \- run a script written in sweet-expressions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ll +8
.B sweet-run
.ll -8
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I sweet-run
runs an arbitrary script that is expressed using sweet-expressions.
It is typically named as the executable in the first line of a file,
somewhere after "#!".
That file's contents (after the first line)
are run through the sweet-expression filter
.I unsweeten
and the results are then executed.
.PP
Note that only the specified script is read in using
sweet-expressions; in particular, any dependencies read
in using
.I load
or
.I use-modules
are still processed as traditional s-expressions.
.PP
For more information, see
http://readable.sourceforge.net.


.SH OPTIONS
.PP
None.

.\" .SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.\" .PP

.\" .SH BUGS
.\" .PP

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
An example use might be the following, to create a guile script using
sweet-expressions:

  #!/usr/bin/env sweet-run
  ;#!guile -s
  ;!#
  define factorial(n)
    if {n <= 1}
      1
      {n * factorial{n - 1}}

  display factorial(9)

.PP
You could replace "guile -s" with "scsh -s" to run Scheme shell (scsh)
instead of guile.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
.IR sweeten(1) ,
.IR unsweeten(1) .


.SH "COPYRIGHT NOTICE"
.PP
Copyright \(co 2012 David A. Wheeler
.PP
This software (including the documentation)
is released as open source software under the "MIT" license:
.PP
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.PP
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.PP
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

